# W1;L1

Not programming languages!

Programming **notations**.

## Logistic Stuff

Office: 363 Engineering 6

M: 2:15 - 3:15

R: 11 - 12



Textbook: Webber

- Does not cover everything
- Covers light material but very well
- Main sections: 
  - ML
  - Java
  - Prolog



open book/note, closed computer

## Literate Programming

Donald Knuth invented the `TEX` system to better type and print out his textbook (*The Art of Computer Programming*) because his publishing company printed his equations out ugly.

To do this, it got annoying to have to change the documentation (a `.tex` file) every time he changed the source code (a `.pascal` file). So, why not have them in **one file**?

Ex: You have a `.tex.pascal` file and this will generate a `.tex` file **and** a `.pascal` file (documentation and source code, respectively).



*Choice of notation matters.*



## Solution to Word Count Ordering Problem

```bash
tr -cs A-Za-z '[\n*]' | sort | uniq -c | sort -rn
```

where:

- tr -c is complement
- tr -s is squeeze
- uniq -c is count duplicates
- sort -r is reverse
- sort -n is numeric

## Why Do We Have This Class?

Computer science is tackling some of the most complex and difficult problems of this generation.

We need smart ways to deal with these problems, to control this complexity, and to manage this data in clear and easy-to-understand **notation.**

## Q&A

*Q: Why are there so many programming languages? Why not just one "metanotation"? A universal programming language!*



*Q: My AI software is too slow. It's in Lisp. I rewrote it in C++. It's faster but crashes all the time. What should I do?*



Well, no answers yet...

## Language Design :art: Issues :heavy_exclamation_mark:

:diamond_shape_with_a_dot_inside: Orthogonality - Your choice in one particular area does not limit you in other areas. 

- A good language is orthogonal.
- C is **not** orthogonal - a function can return any data type except arrays. 
  - Here, your choice of one metric (writing a function) limited your choice of another (return type)



:white_check_mark: Efficiency - Efficiency in many different metrics (time (CPU time or real time?), space, I/O requests, energy, network latency).

- C **is** simple



:tanabata_tree: Simplicity

- C is **not** simple



:icecream: Convenience

- C **is** convenience, although not simple!
- Ex: Many different ways to add (which makes the system complex but easier and more freeing to write in)

```c
i = i + 1; i += 1; i++
```



:warning: Safety - The likelihood of avoiding crashes.

- Static vs dynamic type checking



:running_man: Concurrency and parallelism - How well a language supports programs running in parallel.



:ocean: Mutability - How easy is it to change or extend the language?

- You need the ability to mutate (make changes to) a language, or else it will die :skull:

